---
layout: post
title: "Let's Talk About Retros"
tags: [general, agile]
published: false
---

I'm going to take a quick break from direct software development topics for this post. I want to take some time to talk about something more related to Agile: retros. After some recent retros with my team they've been on my mind recently, so I want to share my thoughts on them.

### What is a Retro?

If you're reading this post then you most likely already have an idea of what a retro is because your team regularly has them. But to summarize, a retro is a team ritual that allows the members to look back (and ahead) at a chunk of time (usually a sprint or some form of iteration). They can take many forms, but generally team members have a chance to celebrate positives and call out concerns that need addressing. Seems pretty straightforward, right? Not exactly. With this post I want to challenge you to think about retros as more than just their structure but as potentially something more meaningful to your team.

Before we move on, let's talk about what retros _aren't_. I'm not going into a lot of details on these topics because I think they speak for themselves, but here are a few things that I think should be *avoided*:

* Direct Criticism - you should never be purposefully publicly shaming, if you need to provide critical feedback to a teammate this should be done in a private one-on-one with the person. This includes things like saying, "We failed to meet our deliverable because Tom didn't get his work done".
* Solving Every Problem - You won't solve every problem on your team, retros are great for identifying problems but unless there's a quick solution the actual solving should be addressed directly in a more focused meeting.
* Skipping the Positives - Earlier I used the word "celebrate" and I mean it. Seriously, it can make a huge difference to moral by simply celebrating even the smallest wins.
* Ignoring Tough Discussions - This goes together with the last one, the team needs to hear out all of the concerns. If someone has the courage to bring up a concern, then that should be rewarded by hearing them out.
* Allow Distractions - The whole team needs to be present for the retro to be affective, so if need be leave your phone in your pocket or at your desk.

I could keep going with this list, but the main point I want to drive home is that retros should be a place for building strong psychological safety on the team.

### Team Building

Speaking of building aspects of the team, let's talk about how retros build strong teams. I mentioned earlier how retros are more than just a structured way of looking back (or ahead). I truly believe that by investing in retros struggling teams can become more cohesive or awesome teams can continue to be even more awesome. So here's my single sentence philosophy on retros:

*Retros are a unique chance for the entire team to take a pause from day-to-day tasks so they can come together to celebrate success and acknowledge concerns*

So how does that relate to team building? There are two main parts to this statement that I want to focus on in regards to team building:
1. The _entire_ team comes together - 
1. Taking a pause - 

### Addressing Common Complaints


> I don't want to go to retro, I want to do real work

> Retro is so boring, can we skip it this time?

> Nothing ever changes, so what's the point?

### 
